and just coming in to generally harass you and give you a hard time, beat a little butt or whatever he felt like doing in his drunken stupor, and I finally got enough of that.
I said, I'm gonna get Bobby Dixon, but he was smart enough to know that we'd be out for him, and he always locked his door, always.
We had two rooms with a John in between so that there was access through his door and through the other door and through the crapper.
And that meant that both of them had to lock their doors because the crapper didn't have any locks on the door.
Well, I was, like I said, waiting for the right chance.
And one night he came in.
He was always singing and yelling.
He had a car and he'd drive in the back parking lot of Hart Hall and you could hear him as soon as he drove in the lot, yelling and singing and hollering at whoever he was gonna get that particular night.
And anyway, as soon as we heard him coming in, we had a wastebasket, about five gallons, filled it up out of the cooler
and it was wintertime, and I mean this was a cold night.
And for some reason or another, Bobby, we barricaded the door, put the bed up there, blocked ourselves against the wall, because we knew he was coming in, but he didn't.
He went on into his room, and after 30 minutes, we didn't hear anything, so we moved everything out of the way and opened the door, and you could hear him snoring over there, because he was a big, heavy guy.
I checked the door across the hall from me.
Here's his down here.
It's open.
Perfect.
I took that five gallons and tiptoed in there and this is like one or two o'clock in the morning, Sunday morning.
It's always Saturday night, Sunday morning.
He's in there on his back, covered up with blankets,
like this with mouth open snoring.
And I poured five gallons of water right in his face.
Cold water.
And I turned around and ran and slammed that door and tiptoed across the hall.
Of course, we threw the bed.
We put everything we had in that room.
not only up against our door but against the crapper door as well and waited.
And all we could hear was coughing and gurgling.
Not even any cussing, which would be his normal thing.
And I nearly drowned the guy.
He wasn't able.
He was not able.
Not only was he drunk, he was sound asleep with his mouth wide open, and I'd like to have drowned him.
Not that it's funny, but all I can say is he got what he asked for, but never again.
He didn't bother anybody anymore after that.
He was quiet, sedate,
didn't bother anybody after that, so help me.
And Bobby Dixon graduated and went into the Air Force and became a 30-year career officer, and he retired and lives in Austin.
I haven't had a chance to corner him and laugh with him a little.
I hope he'll laugh, but he retired as a colonel in the Air Force.
Now, as you, as you began to
to move up in athletic status, what role did you think athletics played in your life or might play in the future?
Was it, was athletics ever to you as a potential career?
No, sir.
Not at all.
You never thought about coaching or anything like that?
No.
My career goal was set when I was very young.
I wanted to be in agriculture.
Okay.
And I didn't consider any other goals.
I thought about, you know, what was the potential in professional football at one time, but they pay you $10,000 a year maybe to break your bones.
It was not an attractive career at that point in time in the early 1950s.
So I didn't give it any thought at all really.
To whom did you eventually turn when you needed professional advice?
Was there some,
Somebody here that you developed a relationship with, an advisor, like later would be an R.C.
Potts would have had that role in agriculture.
You know, I have thought about that point, Dr. Monroe, about the advisors, the counselors, the role models, the mentor programs.
There's a network, a blanket of it at A&M now, and it's all good.
To my knowledge, very little of that was available except as a one-on-one thing that you developed with a particular person that you respected.
Did you develop that with somebody?
I felt comfortable visiting with Dr. Butler.
He was as much of a role model for me at that time as anybody.
And he was quite willing and quite able
answer any question and serve as a counselor in those days.
He just got perturbed with me when I wanted to change fields.
Did he, would you turn to him for advice on do I take this course or this course?
Yes.
All right.
Oh, yes.
And do you remember any?
But, but when you, if you remember, the, the catalog, the college catalog, Animal Husbandry, had it laid out.
Yeah.
Your options were few.
Your electives were few, 144 hours.
Now, as you're finishing your sophomore year and junior and senior, did you develop some close friendships?
Who were your dearest buddies?
Well, my closest buddy was still my friend from Morenza's Pass, Hal Parks, whom I went, made him into first grade and went through the ninth grade with him, went through A&M with him, went through two and a half years in the Army with him.
Oh my, that is awesome.
And have stayed in touch all of our lives.
That's great.
Know his children and his grandchildren and vice versa.
Hal Parks was my number one friend through all of this, but others, Jimmy Everett down at Bay City.
My goodness, the friendships are many.
Again, Lee Phillips, even though I only lived over in the Corps a short time, Lee Phillips to this day is, to me, good a friend as I've got.
I love the guy.
He's such a wonderful person.
Many of them in the vet school.
I came back to vet school when I was 26 years old and got that degree when I was 30.
And a lot of the people over there I looked to as mentors.
To who, where, you and your buddies when you're undergraduates, if you had an unscheduled Saturday night, it's yours to have good time.
What would you all have done?
Where would you have gone for a, what you all considered a pleasant evening?
Well, there wasn't much social life on this campus, as you know.
If we didn't sneak in Gun Hall, we'd start paying.
After we got our ROTC money, we'd pay the quarter.
We'd go see a movie.
If somebody had a car and would gather up a half a dozen of us, we'd go down to the Triangle and have a hamburger, something to drink.
Come back to the dorm.
Did you go to downtown Bryan much?
Oh, no.
Hardly ever.
We didn't go anywhere.
Now, Whiskey Bridge existed.
Whiskey Bridge existed.
There was a liquor store out there on the north side of Highway 60.
I never went out there.
I didn't drink.
And was, was, uh, Hard Liquors, was it there in your days?
Yes.
Okay.
Uncle Ed's?
Mm-hmm.
Uh, now what, uh, nobody knows exactly where it was.
About how far south of, uh, that intersection with Welburn Road?
Well, now, it was,
Was it down about where Holloman is now?
Was it that far down?
No, it wasn't quite that far.
It was back up this way about where that little shopping center is.
It has a Chinese restaurant or whatever on the left there.
It was not as far as Holloman Street.
On the left, of course, railroad tracks on the other side.
It was there.
I think they had the
What do you call them?
Shuffle.
Shuffleboard.
They had a shuffleboard there.
But I didn't spend a lot of time there.
Let's see, what about MSC?
How often did you and your buddies go?
Oh, every day.
The MSC was the center of activities for us on campus.
It was the post office for us was in the MSC then.
You could get snacks over there.
You could go over there and sit down and study.
They had a bowling alley.
There's one thing that we might do on a Saturday night was go bowl in the bowling alley.
It was the center of activities on campus.
And you all didn't even know the words heroin and marijuana?
I couldn't have told you what either one of them was if you'd have asked me.
And smoking with cigarettes, let's see, Lucky Strikes and Camels and?
That's basically it.
Did, was there much chewing tobacco or snuff?
No.
And no pipes.
No pipes.
That's what I thought.
And cigars were too costly.
Maybe.
Well, I remember, well, after the Georgia game that we won, Coach Bryant brought a box of cigars.
Really?
Shut here, boys.
Light up.
All right, now, you mentioned him.
He's hired after, for you, which year?
Coach Bryant came to work at A&M in February of 1954, just before spring break, spring training.
So you've got one more year left?
I've got one more year of eligibility left.
How did you and your buddies hear that he had been selected?
We didn't hear how he'd been selected.
No, I mean, I mean, yeah, but how did y'all get the news?
That's what I was meaning.
Were you called together or did you read it in the paper?
We were, to my knowledge, Haskell were not called together.
1954 was 47 years ago.
I do not remember a meeting where Coach George called us together and told us that he was leaving and that Coach Bryant was coming.
So help me.
Newspaper, battalion, and word of mouth is the way we got all information then.
And what was the reaction for you and your buddies to his selection?
Do you remember?
A lot of apprehension because
I'll tell you a quick little story that made us wonder what we were in for.
You may not remember, but just the previous year, we went up to Kentucky and played them and beat them.
It was a night game.
And you all were five and five that year.
And after the ball game, we had showered, dressed, and got on our bus.
And as we were leaving, we looked over, I can still see, looking over my right shoulder out of the bus, the stadium is all lit up.
And Coach Bryant has the team out there scrimmaging because they got their butt beat at 11 o'clock at night.
We remembered that.
Do you remember when you first saw him?
Oh, yes.
There was a squad meeting or what?
Oh, no.
Listen, that night that he flew in, he went right to the Grove and got up on the platform, and we got up on there with him.
We were just told that he was going to be there, and we went to the Grove from Hart Hall, and that was our first exposure to him when he pulled his coat off and stomped on it and charmed him.
like only Paul Bryant could do.
And what did you guys think when you got back?
What did you all say to each other when you got back to the dorm?
Well, we'd heard lots of stories about how tough and mean he was.
And we'd seen what he'd done when we beat him up there.
And we saw him get up there and give a good presentation spontaneously.
I mean, I called him the silver-tongued devil because he could charm any kind of crowd, whether it's little old ladies or young people or what.
He could.
He was extremely articulate when he wanted to be.
And he was comparatively young at that time, wasn't he?
Forty.
Early forties.
Forty, forty-one.
Yeah.
And a very imposing man.
About six-three or six-four and about two-thirty.
Oh, I didn't realize he was that big.
He's a big man.
Oh, okay.
So that added.
Imposing.
That added to the.
He could look down and intimidate you.
And did.
Did he call you all together soon after that first night?
Did he call?
No.
I don't remember him calling us together.
In fact, I remember going through spring training with him, and I had a good spring training myself.
He put up a list every day, and he started weeding, started cutting them left and right.
A list of what?
Who was still on the squad.
Oh, oh, oh.
which meant he was going to take that scholarship and then he'd have that many more scholarships to give out.
Well, he didn't take the scholarships away.
Oh, really?
He just said, you're not on the team anymore if you're not on this list.
You finish out your school and you're done.
He cut a lot of folks in spring training.
And surprisingly to all of us, spring training was not that difficult.
I wasn't impressed.
I don't know what his plan was, but he has a card up his sleeve that he showed in August.
What about the assistant coaches that he brought with him?
They were quite capable people.
The only, Jim Owens was probably the most capable of the group.
Okay.
Well, Willie Zappalack was a good man.
I like Willie.
He's an Aggie.
Now, had Willie been here before?
Oh yeah, he was with Ray.
Was he?
Okay, so he's a carryover.
He's the only carryover.
The only carryover.
The downside on the personnel was Smokey Harper, the so-called trainer.
Smokey was totally incompetent.
I didn't even think he was an especially nice kind of fellow.
He was a dipper and chewer, along with his hard liquor.
In total absence of any medical knowledge whatsoever.
He didn't know how to put a Band-Aid on it.
What was Jerry Claiborne's role?
Jerry Claiborne, gosh.
Because I understand that he was the one with my, the people that later I would meet as faculty colleagues a few years later told me he was the one who would come and speak to them very, very tactfully.
if some key football player's grades were in danger.
Never put any pressure on anything.
He would drop his Phi Beta Kappa key so you would be sure and see it as he looked to see what time it was.
And if you didn't comment on it the first time, he'd have to check the time again.
Quite a change.
Now, at practice, was it obvious that who the head coach was?
Yes, sir.
Almost to the point of, well, he was quite obvious.
Did he use strong language in the presence of the team?
Coach Paul Bryant was the most profane man, the most vulgar man,
on the football field of anybody I have ever witnessed in my life, period.
That's what I thought.
Let's see, let me.
So spring training.
What it amounted to, Gene needed some maturing.
Yeah, yeah.
All right, so that first spring was comparatively mild.
Yes.
All right, then you were, do you remember where you worked that last summer before your senior year?
I had to go to summer camp.
Ah, yes.
Six weeks at Fort Knox.
Wonderful experience.
How well prepared did you feel being at A&M had made you out front with the best of them?
I felt very comfortable with my training.
and felt competitive with anybody that they stood me up against.
What impression do you think the summer training people had about A&M to begin with?
I thought that they felt like that we'd match up with West Point or anybody else.
They spoke highly of us.
Now, you never considered a lifetime career in the military.
Yes.
Oh, you did?
After graduation, we spent a year at Fort Knox, and then were moved to Frankfurt, Germany, or thereabouts.
And I spent a year there.
And life in the military was pretty cush when there's not a war.
And in 1955 and six, seven, when I was there, there was not a war.
There was a Hungarian uprising, and we were getting ready for that.
We thought we were going to be shipped over there.
I talked to my wife about the possibility of a military career, 20 years, and we decided we would stay over there an extra six months.
So I signed up for an extra six months to give consideration to that.
And the reason that I did that, Dr. Monroe, was that
They wanted me to play football and coach football when I went to the military.
They're the most avid sports fans there are in the world.
They're ridiculous about it is what it amounts to and I won't go into any of those crazy stories.
But I played football at Fort Knox until I absolutely obliterated my left knee.
Bent it backwards and tore everything in there
And then they said they wanted me to coach.
So I coached out the rest of that season and when I got over to Germany, they appointed me the athletic and recreation officer and they wanted me to coach the football team and the basketball team and the baseball team and be a jock.
And okay, I mean, you know, that's not really tough.
But then this Hungarian thing came up and I went to my commanding officer and I said, hey, look, sir, I've been a jock for y'all for about a year and a half now and there's rumblings across the world that might require some military training and I want to be transferred out of this job and I want to go to a line company and learn how to be
a platoon leader or a company commander and they transferred me out and I spent that extra six months learning about that.
I became the executive officer of my company.
My company commander and his wife both were absolute alcoholics and so basically I ran the company.
And we talked about it and talked about it and finally based on
Two things, we said we don't want a military career.
Far and away, the majority of the officers, as well as the NCOs, were alcoholics.
Don't want any part of that.
And number two, we didn't want to raise our children in that environment where we had to move around all the time, changing locations, and we said no, and we gave it up.
That was my extent of considering the military as an option.
It's not a good environment to raise children in.
All right, meanwhile back here
As you're getting ready to be a senior, you go football practice, your senior practice, you reported to College Station and then went west on a bus.
Yes, sir.
To another training location.
Much to everybody's surprise.
I was going to ask, y'all did not know that the- No prior knowledge, didn't even know where we were going when we got on the bus.
And did anybody tell you?
Oh, at some point when we were on that bus trip, somebody said we were going to Junction.
Did nobody told you to bring clothes for a certain period of time?
They told us what to bring.
Oh, okay.
But like one change of clothes.
We didn't have anything to do out there but play football and lick our wounds in between.
Yeah, about 100 people.
went out there?
That's what they say.
Somebody said there was 111 of us.
Okay.
And describe the, when you first saw the facilities at Junction, describe those.
Let me close that window there.
Take that off.
When you got to Junction, what did it look like, the NX?
Well, it looked primitive.
There were these little Quonset huts.
I don't remember how many, half a dozen maybe.
And, but it was right next to the Llano River and that was flowing, believe it or not, in 1954.
And I remember the first afternoon,
He said, you all can go swimming if you want.
We went swimming one time and that was it.
Really?
And, but kind of barren because of the drought.
It was terribly dry out there.
Now the, what was a typical day's activities?
What time did you all get up and start practice and so forth?
Get up before daylight.
eat breakfast if you dared.
Most of us were smarter than that by daylight which would be oh I don't know somewhere around seven o'clock or so.
We'd hit the practice field which was nothing but a sandlot with no grass, rocks,
cactus, whatever, it was just a pasture.
And it would go about three hours, somewhere between 10, 10.30 you'd be through, and come in and go down to the river
wash the sweat and dirt off of you which was just right there and then go get in your bunk before it got too hot so you could rest a little and lick your wounds and eat lunch and by that time
it was probably over 100 degrees and those little Quonset huts were just 10.
You'd really, between the two scrimmages each day, you'd try to rest and relax and drink and drink.
I'm telling you,
The worst practices I've ever seen in my life anywhere.
Now, and the afternoon was about three-hour practice also?
About the same.
Right.
Then you took a break, came in for supper.
Clean up and go in for supper.
What was there at night?
Was there anything else?
I don't remember any.
There wasn't even a place to meet at night.
Well, oh, oh, and so, okay, so there was no squad meeting or lectures or?
Oh, no.
No, there weren't any lectures.
These two practices, were they by and large as an entire team or did they all break down to the backs and the offense and the defense and all that?
Well, it depends on at what stage of the time frame.
When we're starting out,
and depend on Coach Bryant's attitude.
His attitude just kept getting worse and worse and worse.
And there are many stories that I could relate about that.
Almost invariably, if you are a coach, you know you have to warm up.
So, you know, we'd have calisthenics.
and that would be in the neighborhood of 15 minutes or so.
You would start, actually run around to whatever, a couple of laps to get loosened up and then you have the calisthenics and then you break up and then start doing two-on-ones and, you know, different procedures.
But what I'm saying is that with each subsequent day that there was less and less of this,
and more and more of nothing but get out there and start knocking heads and scrimmage.
Oh, okay.
In fact, there were times when he'd come out and say, we're just going to start scrimmaging first, period, without even warming up.
And almost everybody's involved.
Almost nobody is standing around doing nothing.
No, there's nobody that's standing around.
The ones that are injured, if there are any injured, they're doing what they need to do to rehabilitate and everybody else is participating because it quickly became hard to find 22 people to line up against each other.
And during, in that era, didn't drink water or any other liquid during practice, did you?
That's what I thought.
Nothing.
Salt pills after practice?
Salt tablets?
They gave salt tablets out during the day, yes.
But you have to be careful about taking them and they make you throw up.
They sure did me.
And then when practice was over, was there anything that anybody drank other than water?
Not other than at mealtime when we had tea.
There were, I don't remember any soft drinks there, just tea.
And you drank it by the gallon actually.
When did some, when did, how many days was it before some people started leaving?